Issue/2704 (#1552)
ooni/probe-cli: internal/enginenetx/DESIGN.md

# Engine Network Extensions

This file documents the [./internal/enginenetx](.) package design. The content is current
as of [probe-cli#1552](https://github.com/ooni/probe-cli/pull/1552).

## Table of Contents

- [Goals & Assumptions](#goals--assumptions)
- [High-Level API](#high-level-api)
- [Creating TLS Connections](#creating-tls-connections)
- [Dialing Tactics](#dialing-tactics)
- [Dialing Algorithm](#dialing-algorithm)
- [Dialing Policies](#dialing-policies)
	- [dnsPolicy](#dnspolicy)
	- [userPolicy](#userpolicy)
	- [statsPolicy](#statspolicy)
	- [bridgePolicy](#bridgepolicy)
- [Overall Algorithm](#overall-algorithm)
- [Managing Stats](#managing-stats)
- [Real-World Scenarios](#real-world-scenarios)
	- [Invalid bridge without cached data](#invalid-bridge-without-cached-data)
	- [Invalid bridge with cached data](#invalid-bridge-with-cached-data)
	- [Valid bridge with invalid cached data](#valid-bridge-with-invalid-cached-data)
- [Limitations and Future Work](#limitations-and-future-work)

## Goals & Assumptions

We define "bridge" an IP address with the following properties:

> 1. the IP address is not expected to change;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. the IP address is not expected to change frequently;
```

2. the IP address listens on port 443 and accepts _any_ incoming SNI;

> 3. the webserver on port 443 proxies to the OONI APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. the webserver on port 443 provides unified access to [OONI API services](https://docs.ooni.org/backend/ooniapi/services/).
```

We also assume that the Web Connectivity test helpers (TH) could accept any SNIs.

We also define "tactic" a tactic to perform a TLS handshake either with a
bridge or with a TH. We also define "policy" the collection of algorithms for
producing tactics for performing TLS handshakes.

Considering all of this, this package aims to:

1. overcome DNS-based censorship for "api.ooni.io" by hardcoding known-good
bridges IP addresses inside the codebase;

2. overcome SNI-based censorship for "api.ooni.io" and test helpers by choosing
from a pre-defined list of SNIs;

3. remember and use tactics for creating TLS connections that worked previously;

4. recover ~quickly if the conditions change (e.g., if a bridge is discontinued);

5. adopt a censored-users-first approach where the strategy we use by default
should allow for smooth operations _for them_ rather than prioritizing the

> non-censored case and using additional tactics as the fallback;

Author: Can you provide a suggestion of how you would rephrase this requirement? 🙏

> non-censored case and using additional tactics as the fallback;

Author: Thanks, added as a suggestion!

> 5. adopt a censored-users-first approach where the strategy we use by default
> should allow for smooth operations _for them_ rather than prioritizing the
> non-censored case and using additional tactics as the fallback;

Author: ```suggestion
5. for users in censored regions it should be possible to use tactics to overcome the restrictions;
```

Adding suggestion from @hellais

6. try to defer sending the true `SNI` on the wire, therefore trying to
avoid triggering potential residual censorship blocking a given TCP endpoint
for some time regardless of what `SNI` is being used next;

7. allow users to force specific bridges and SNIs by editing `$OONI_HOME/engine/bridges.conf`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. In the event of no censorship affecting OONI API Services, the fact no tactic is working should not be a hindrance to communicating with the API. 
```

Author: I find this new requirement to be partially aligned with this requirement:

> 4. recover ~quickly if the conditions change (e.g., if a bridge is discontinued);

I say this because they both morally say that the system should work without big performance penalties in case there's no censorship and/or conditions change. However, your proposal for 8 is more strict and in fact looks to me like a stricter version of 4.

As such, could you propose an edit that amends 4 rather than introducing 8? Thank you!

Reviewer: done

Author: Thanks!

Here we're also using the [mix.go](mix.go) algorithm to remix
two different sources of tactics:

1. the `bridgesTacticsForDomain` only returns tactics for "api.ooni.io"
using existing knowledge of bridges and random SNIs;

2. the `maybeRewriteTestHelpersTactics` method filters the results
coming from the fallback tactic such that, if we are connecting
to a known test-helper domain name, we're trying to hide its SNI.

The first two returned tactics will be bridges tactics for "api.ooni.io",
if applicable, followed by two tactics generated using the DNS,
followed by a random remix of all the remaining tactics. This choice of
returning two and two tactics first, is the
reason why in `statsPolicy` we return the first four tactics from
the fallback after getting two tactics from the stats.

## Overall Algorithm

The composed policy is as described in Diagram 1.

Therefore, the compose policy will return the following tactics:

1. if there is a `$OONI_HOME/engine/bridges.conf` with a valid entry,
use it without trying more tactics; otherwise,

2. use the first two tactics coming from stats, if any;

3. then use the first two tactics coming from bridges, if any;

> 4. then use the first two tactics coming from the DNS, if successful;

Reviewer: Can we flip the order of these around in the algorithm so that if DNS is working we use that instead of relying on the bridges?

Basically it would be optimal if we first tried everywhere the simple case (i.e. direct DNS resolution without the hardcoded bridge) and then only if that failed we moved onto trying the hardcoded bridge IP.

Author: Yes, it is possible to do that by changing the order with which we construct and compose policies.

I will modify the code to this effect.

5. finally, randomly remix the remaining tactics.

Excluding the case where we have a valid entry in `bridges.conf`, the following
diagram illustrates how we're mixing tactics:

> 

Reviewer: Do I understand it correctly, that in the default thing we ship in probe we effectively have a `bridges.conf` file with the hardcoded IP?

Author: We have discussed this in person. Here's a recap of the conversation, for the records. The `bridges.conf` is user provided and, as such, completely overrides any other tactic. What we ship with the probe is:

1. similar to `bridges.conf` in that it hardcodes a configuration;
2. different from `bridges.conf` in that it is just one of the pieces of information used to dial.

I remember that, when we chatted, you had some suggestions regarding wording that could have helped clarify the difference. Please, provide them such that I can integrate them! 🙏

Reviewer: Re-reading it I think it's fine. I'm not sure how the text can be improved if not trying to make it more concise, but I suggest we do that as future iterations.

Author: ack!

[      0.264132] <info> sessionresolver: lookup api.ooni.io using https://wikimedia-dns.org/dns-query... ok
[      0.501774] <info> httpsDialer: [#1] TCPConnect 10.0.0.1:443... in progress
[      1.002330] <info> httpsDialer: [#2] TCPConnect 10.0.0.1:443... started
[      1.503687] <info> httpsDialer: [#2] TCPConnect 10.0.0.1:443... in progress
[      2.001488] <info> httpsDialer: [#4] TCPConnect 162.55.247.208:443... started
[      2.046917] <info> httpsDialer: [#4] TCPConnect 162.55.247.208:443... ok
[      2.047016] <info> httpsDialer: [#4] TLSHandshake with 162.55.247.208:443 SNI=api.ooni.io ALPN=[h2 http/1.1]... started
[      2.093148] <info> httpsDialer: [#4] TLSHandshake with 162.55.247.208:443 SNI=api.ooni.io ALPN=[h2 http/1.1]... ok
[      2.093181] <info> httpsDialer: [#4] TLSVerifyCertificateChain api.ooni.io... started
[      2.095923] <info> httpsDialer: [#4] TLSVerifyCertificateChain api.ooni.io... ok
[      2.096054] <info> httpsDialer: [#1] TCPConnect 10.0.0.1:443... interrupted
[      2.096077] <info> httpsDialer: [#2] TCPConnect 10.0.0.1:443... interrupted
```

**Listing 8.** Run with no previous cached state and unreachable hardcoded bridge address.

> After 2s, we start dialing with the IP addresses obtained through the DNS.

Reviewer: My understanding is that this is taking this amount of time, because we are trying the bridges first (see: https://github.com/ooni/probe-cli/pull/1552/files#r1576554009), can we invert the order so that we always try first via DNS in the case of an empty cache?

Author: Yes, it is possible to do that by changing the order with which we construct and compose policies.

I will modify the code to this effect.
